# Architecture

This document describes the key components of LuaRadio and how they interact.

## Table of Contents

* [Overview](#overview)
    * [Block Model](#block-model)
    * [Serialization](#serialization)
    * [Concurrency](#concurrency)
    * [Memory](#memory)
    * [Areas of Improvement](#areas-of-improvement)
* [Concepts](#concepts)
    * [Data Types](#data-types)
    * [Vectors](#vectors)
    * [Blocks](#blocks)
        * [Type Signatures](#type-signatures)
        * [Instantiation](#instantiation)
        * [Differentiation](#differentiation)
        * [Initialization](#initialization)
        * [Processing](#processing)
        * [Running](#running)
        * [Termination](#termination)
    * [Composite Blocks](#composite-blocks)
        * [Hierarchical Blocks](#hierarchical-block)
        * [Top-level Blocks](#top-level-block)
            * [Connection](#connection-1)
            * [Run Preparation](#run-preparation)
            * [Running](#running-1)
            * [Flow Graph Control](#flow-graph-control)

## Overview

### Block Model

Blocks provide a `process(...)` method that accepts vectors of input samples as
arguments, processes them, and returns vectors of output samples. Blocks may
retain state.

Input sample vectors must be processed in their entirety by blocks in
`process(...)`. Samples across multiple inputs are synchronized, meaning that
the multiple input vectors are always of the same length, and samples across
the input vectors all correspond to the same timestep.

Output sample vectors may be produced by blocks asynchronously, meaning that
there is no requirement on the amount of output samples produced, or on which
call to `process(...)` that output samples are produced.

### Serialization

Vectors of samples are serialized between output and input ports of blocks over
anonymous UNIX sockets.

Vectors of [`CStruct` data type](0.reference-manual.md#cstructtype) samples are
serialized raw, in their native memory representation, with no marshalling or
unmarshalling.

Vectors of [`Object` data type](0.reference-manual.md#objecttype) samples are
marshalled and unmarshalled with [MessagePack](http://msgpack.org/) and
serialized as byte strings, preceded by their length.

### Concurrency

LuaRadio uses multi-processing. Every block is run in its own process under its
own Lua state.

Blocks do not share memory. Blocks use IPC to serialize samples to other blocks
and communicate with applications.

### Memory

Memory for input samples is allocated once. A persistent buffer is allocated
for each block input port, where raw input samples are read into.  The raw
input samples are cast into read-only vectors, which are provided as the
arguments to the block's `process(...)` method.

Memory for output samples is typically allocated once by each block.  Blocks
are responsible for managing their own output sample memory.  Most blocks
create a persistent output sample vector in their `initialize()` method, and
resize it as needed in `process(...)` to store the computed output samples.
However, this is not strictly enforced by the framework.

Blocks that do reuse output sample vectors have constant memory usage in the
steady state. The output sample vectors approach a stable size, as they are
resized in `process(...)` to accommodate the inputs vectors the block consumes.

All objects in LuaRadio are garbage collected, although this mainly applies to
transient objects. The input and output sample memory in the situations
described above is anchored throughout the processing lifetime of the block.

### Areas of Improvement

Moving a vector of samples between blocks has an overhead of two copies: one
from writing it to the UNIX socket in the producing block, and one from reading
it from the UNIX socket in the consuming block.  This overhead could be reduced
to one copy, by changing the sample transport from UNIX sockets to a shared
memory circular buffer (not unlike GNU Radio).

The overhead could be further reduced to zero copies, if the vectors for output
samples were not allocated by the block, but instead pointers into the
persistent shared memory circular buffer (also not unlike GNU Radio) that is
shared between the output and input port.  Implementing this would likely
require a different `process(...)` signature that includes the outputs vectors
as arguments, and a new resizing mechanism for output vectors.

Multi-processing instead of multi-threading for concurrency incurs some memory
and CPU overhead from requiring a process for each block. However,
multi-threading poses other issues, like sharing instantiated and initialized
block state of the parent thread with the Lua state of each child thread. This
problem is addressed in the multi-processing architecture with forking.

Block processes currently have a slightly larger memory footprint than
necessary, as other blocks and their initialized objects, e.g. buffers
allocated in `initialize()`, are not yet released after forking. This can be
addressed by pruning references to all unneeded blocks and associated
connectivity after forking.

Blocks cannot be manipulated at runtime, e.g. modifying their attributes or
calling methods on them, since each block runs in an independent Lua state.
This could be worked around by implementing RPC for these attributes and calls,
but this would add substantial complexity.

## Concepts

### Data Types

Samples are typed by special data types that implement the necessary interface
to be serialized and deserialized between blocks. These data types can either
be [`CStruct` types](0.reference-manual.md#cstructtype), which are backed by a
C structure, or [`Object` types](0.reference-manual.md#objecttype), which are
backed by a Lua object.

`CStruct` types are serialized as raw contiguous samples between blocks in
their native memory representation, with no marshalling and unmarshalling.
These types must be of a fixed size, so the sample boundaries are well-defined
in the stream.

`Object` types are serialized as [MessagePack](http://msgpack.org/) marshalled
bytes between blocks. These types can be variable size, may nest other Lua
types, and may have optional members.

LuaRadio has four basic types, all of which are `CStruct` types. These are the
[`ComplexFloat32`](0.reference-manual.md#complexfloat32),
[`Float32`](0.reference-manual.md#float32), [`Bit`](0.reference-manual.md#bit),
and [`Byte`](0.reference-manual.md#byte) types.

They are backed by the following C structure types:

``` c
typedef struct {
    float real;
    float imag;
} complex_float32_t;

typedef struct {
    float value;
} float32_t;

typedef struct {
    uint8_t value;
} bit_t;

typedef struct {
    uint8_t value;
} byte_t;
```

The use of a structure to back `CStruct` types, rather than the raw C type
(e.g.  `float`), is for implementation reasons. It allows the framework to
associate a metatable with the type using [LuaJIT
FFI](http://luajit.org/ext_ffi.html) library's
[`ffi.metatype()`](http://luajit.org/ext_ffi_api.html#ffi_metatype), to bind
useful metamethods and methods to all instances of the type. It also makes
those instances distinct from other occurrences of the underlying data types
(e.g.  `float32_t` vs `float`).

Users can define their own `CStruct` and `Object` types and bind methods to
them. See the [Creating Blocks](3.creating-blocks.md#custom-types) guide for
more details and examples.

Code reference: [CStruct class](../radio/types/cstruct.lua), [Object
class](../radio/types/object.lua).

### Vectors

It would be inefficient for blocks to process one sample at a time, as the
overhead of serializing the sample and calling the block to process it would
exceed the cost of processing it. Instead, blocks operate on a vector of
samples at a time, to amortize the overhead of serialization.

Vectors are dynamic arrays of a `CStruct` or `Object` data type.  Blocks get
their inputs as vectors, and return their outputs as vectors.

Each data type provides two static methods for creating a vector of itself:
`.vector(num)` for a zero-initialized vector, or `.vector_from_array(arr)` for
a vector initialized from a Lua array. For example:

``` lua
-- ComplexFloat32 vector of length 16
local vec = radio.types.ComplexFloat32.vector(16)

-- Byte vector of length 10
local vec = radio.types.Byte.vector(10)

-- Float32 vector of length 3 from array initializer
local vec = radio.types.Float32.vector_from_array({1.0, 2.0, 3.0})
```

Vectors can be resized and appended to:

``` lua
local vec = radio.types.Byte.vector(10)
print(vec.length) --> 10

vec:resize(5)
print(vec.length) --> 5

vec:append(radio.types.Byte(0xAA))
print(vec.length) --> 6
```

Vectors of `CStruct` typed samples are laid out contiguously in memory. The
array of samples is available under the `.data` member, and its length under
the `.length` member. These samples can be modified directly in Lua, or can be
passed to an external library for processing.

Resizing a `CStruct` typed vector only causes a re-allocation when it is grown
to a larger size. The underlying buffer is retained on resizing to a smaller
size; just the bookkeeping is updated. This allows blocks that reuse vectors
for output samples to approach constant memory usage, as the underlying memory
of the vectors will reach a stable size for the inputs the block consumes.

All `CStruct` typed vectors are allocated with page alignment, to enable
processing with libraries that require, or perform better with, aligned
buffers. This is often because SIMD operations are involved.

Vectors of `Object` typed samples are stored in a Lua array, but provide a
compatible interface to `CStruct` typed vectors. These vectors cannot be passed
to external libraries.

Code reference: [Vector and ObjectVector classes](../radio/core/vector.lua).

### Blocks

Blocks are classes derived from
[`radio.block.Block`](0.reference-manual.md#block-1) that implement their
functionality in the following methods:

* `instantiate(...)` — constructor
* `initialize()` — initialization (optional)
* `process(...)` — main work method
* `cleanup()` — clean up (optional)

The role of the `instantiate()` constructor is to establish the basic state of
the block and to register its type signatures, which specify the block's
input/output port names and types.

The `initialize()` method is called after the block has been connected in a
flow graph and differentiated. It allows the block to perform additional
initialization based on its differentiated type signature and its sample rate.

The `process()` method is the main work method of the block. It receives input
vectors of samples as arguments, and returns output vectors of samples. This
method is called repeatedly by the framework to process inputs into outputs.

The `cleanup()` method is called by the framework when the flow graph has
collapsed, for additional clean up of resources.

Source blocks and blocks that modify the sample rate must implement the
[`get_rate()`](0.reference-manual.md#blockget_rate)  method, which returns the
source's sample rate as a number, in samples per second.

Code reference: [Block class](../radio/core/block.lua).

#### Type Signatures

A type signature is a description of the input/output port names and data types
of a block. LuaRadio blocks can support multiple type signatures, all of which
must share the same input/output count and names, but may differ in data types.
Blocks register their type signatures in their constructor, so that they can be
connected into a flow graph after they are instantiated. The framework selects
the correct type signature in its differentiation phase, described in its
section below.

Code reference: [Block class](../radio/core/block.lua).

#### Instantiation

The `instantiate(...)` method is called whenever a block is instantiated by
name.  This method takes the arguments passed to the block on instantiation.

Blocks must register type signatures with the
[`add_type_signature()`](0.reference-manual.md#blockadd_type_signatureinputs-outputs-process_funcnil-initialize_funcnil)
method in their `instantiate()` constructor. This method takes an array of
input port descriptors, followed by an array of output port descriptors. Each
port descriptor specifies a name and a data type. For example, an `AddBlock`
that supports both complex-valued and real-valued inputs would register:

``` lua
function AddBlock:instantiate()
    self:add_type_signature({radio.block.Input("in", radio.types.Float32}),
                            {radio.block.Output("out", radio.types.Float32)})
    self:add_type_signature({radio.block.Input("in", radio.types.ComplexFloat32}),
                            {radio.block.Output("out", radio.types.ComplexFloat32)})
end
```

Source and sink blocks may specify empty arrays for inputs or outputs,
respectively, when they add type signatures. Otherwise, sources and sinks are
implemented largely the same way as other blocks.

The `add_type_signature()` method can also be used to specify different
`process()` and `initialize()` methods to type signatures, that are bound to
the block on differentiation. See the [Creating
Blocks](3.creating-blocks.md#type-signatures) guide for examples.

#### Connection

After a block is instantiated, it can be connected into a flow graph under a
`CompositeBlock`. This is described in more detail in the [Composite
Blocks](#composite-blocks) section below.

When the `add_type_signature()` method is called in a block's `instantiate()`
constructor, it builds `InputPort` and `OutputPort` containers for each
specified input and output port of the block, and stores them in arrays under
the `.inputs` and `.outputs` members. These containers are the actual "ports"
connected in a flow graph.  They contain a name and block owner, and are later
populated with their concrete data type and a shared `Pipe` object.

The act of connecting two blocks in a flow graph is registering the block's
`InputPort` instance as the key and the `OutputPort` instance as a value in a
hash table owned by a `CompositeBlock`, thereby building a graph of input and
output connections.

When a connection is made, a `Pipe` object is also created and registered under
both `InputPort` and `OutputPort` containers of the connected blocks. This
`Pipe` object provides an interface for the serialization and deserialization
of sample vectors between blocks. The `Pipe` is how a block reads or writes
vectors of samples from or to another block.

Code reference: [Block class](../radio/core/block.lua), [InputPort, OutputPort,
Pipe classes](../radio/core/pipe.lua).

#### Differentiation

When a flow graph is run, each block in the flow graph is first differentiated
into a compatible type signature. This differentiation starts at the source
blocks and ends at the sink blocks, and is carried out in a downstream order.

A block is differentiated by its input types, using the
[`differentiate()`](0.reference-manual.md#blockdifferentiateinput_data_types)
method. This method takes an array of input data types and differentiates the
block into a compatible type signature, by finding a registered type signature
with matching input data types.  The method raises an error if a compatible
type signature is not found.

Type signatures may also specify a function predicate instead of a concrete
data type for input ports. For example, the
[`JSONSink`](../radio/blocks/sinks/json.lua) does this to accept any data type
that implements `to_json()`. In those cases, `differentiate()` calls the
function predicate with the input type and expects a boolean result to indicate
if the input type is compatible.

The result of differentiation is that the `InputPort` and `OutputPort` ports in
the block's `.inputs` and `.outputs` take on the concrete data types specified
in the selected type signature, and the block's `initialize()` and `process()`
methods are bound to the ones specified in the type signature. The concrete
data types are available to the block with the
[`get_input_type()`](0.reference-manual.md#blockget_input_typeindex1) and
[`get_output_type()`](0.reference-manual.md#blockget_output_typeindex1)
methods.

Since a block is differentiated by its input types, it cannot have
multiple type signatures that share the same input types, as this would cause
ambiguity.

After differentiation, the block's output types are well defined, and can then
be used in the differentiation of downstream blocks.

``` lua
local multiply = radio.MultiplyBlock()

-- Differentiate into the complex-valued flavor of MultiplyBlock
multiply:differentiate({radio.types.ComplexFloat32, radio.types.ComplexFloat32})
```

Code reference: [Block class](../radio/core/block.lua).

#### Initialization

The initialization phase takes place after the differentiation phase in running
a flow graph.  In this phase, every block's `initialize()` method is called,
starting at the source blocks and ending at the sink blocks, in a downstream
order.

In the `initialize()` method, the block can perform data type dependent
initialization with the
[`get_input_type()`](0.reference-manual.md#blockget_input_typeindex1) and
[`get_output_type()`](0.reference-manual.md#blockget_output_typeindex1)
methods, which return the differentiated input and output types of the
specified port index, respectively.

The block can also perform sample rate dependent initialization with
[`get_rate()`](0.reference-manual.md#blockget_rate), which recursively calls
`get_rate()` on upstream blocks in the flow graph to determine the sample rate.
Blocks may modify the sample rate for downstream blocks by overriding this
method, and source blocks are required to implement it to return a concrete
value.

Most blocks will create persistent output sample vectors in `initialize()`, to
be used by `process(...)`. This allows blocks to efficiently produce new
samples without excessive allocations and deallocations.

Code reference: [Block class](../radio/core/block.lua).

#### Processing

The block's `process()` method is called repeatedly in the running phase
of a flow graph to process inputs into outputs.

This method receives a set of input vectors as arguments, corresponding to the
input ports it defined in its type signatures. These inputs are immutable,
read-only vectors and are all of the same length. The `process()` method is
responsible for computing output vectors from these inputs and any block state,
and returning the output vectors in the order corresponding to the output ports
it defined in its type signatures.

Blocks are responsible for managing their output sample vectors. Most blocks
allocate persistent output sample vectors in their `initialize()` method, and
then resize, populate, and return them in `process(...)`. Since vector resizes
only cause re-allocation when they are grown, the underlying memory of output
vectors approach a stable size as the vector is resized to accommodate the
block's inputs.

For example, the process method for adding two inputs might look like:

``` lua
function AddBlock:process(x, y)
    local out = self.out:resize(x.length)

    for i = 0, x.length-1 do
        out.data[i] = x.data[i] + y.data[i]
    end

    return out
end
```

#### Running

After a flow graph is connected, differentiated, and initialized, every block
is run concurrently.

While running, each block's inputs share a `Pipe` object with another block's
output. A block output may have multiple `Pipe` objects to several different
block inputs, but every block input only has one `Pipe` object.

The `Pipe` object provides an interface for the serialization and
deserialization of sample vectors between blocks.  The `read()` method reads a
vector from the pipe. The `write()` method writes a vector to the pipe.

A block is run with its `run()` method, which is a loop that repeatedly reads
input pipes into an array of vectors, calls `process(...)` with these input
vectors, and writes the resulting array of vectors to the output pipes.

Code reference: [Block class](../radio/core/block.lua).

#### Termination

A block runs indefinitely in its `run()` method, until a `read()` on one of the
input `Pipe` objects returns `nil`. This indicates that the upstream block
closed its output `Pipe` and that the flow graph is collapsing.

When an input `Pipe` returns `nil`, the block breaks its main run loop, calls
`cleanup()`, and then closes its output pipes. This causes the downstream
blocks to terminate similarly.

Sources that produce a finite number of samples will exit naturally after they
have produced all of their samples, triggering the collapse of the flow graph.
Sources that run indefinitely, on the other hand, can only be shutdown by the
framework forcibly by the `SIGINT` signal.

A block shutdown does not mean samples are lost. Samples are buffered in the
underlying implementation of the `Pipe`, even after the producing block has
terminated, and the consuming block will only encounter the `nil` on an input
`Pipe` after all of these samples have been consumed. This allows samples from
a finite source to be processed through a flow graph to completion.

Code reference: [Block class](../radio/core/block.lua).

### Composite Blocks

The [`CompositeBlock`](0.reference-manual.md#compositeblock) is a special block
used to build and run flow graphs.  It can either be used as a hierarchical
block: a composition of blocks abstracted into one block with redefined
inputs/outputs at its boundary, or as a top-level block: a composition of
blocks forming a complete flow graph that can be run.

#### Hierarchical Block

A `CompositeBlock` used for a hierarchical block builds an internal flow graph
by connecting block ports with the
[`connect()`](0.reference-manual.md#compositeblockconnect) method, just as a
top-level block would. However, unlike top-level blocks, which have no boundary
inputs or outputs, hierarchical blocks also specify a type signature with
`add_type_signature()` for their boundary inputs and outputs.

When a `CompositeBlock` adds a type signature, instead of building the
`InputPort` and `OutputPort` input and output ports under the `.inputs` and
`.outputs` arrays as a normal block would, the `CompositeBlock` builds
`AliasedInputPort` and `AliasedOutputPort` ports, respectively. These are
special input and output ports that alias existing input and output ports
inside a flow graph.

These aliases are established in calls to `connect()`, when boundary
input/output ports are connected to the input/output ports of concrete blocks
in the flow graph.

Code reference: [CompositeBlock class](../radio/core/composite.lua).

#### Top-level Block

A `CompositeBlock` used for a top-level block builds a flow graph by connecting
block ports with the [`connect()`](0.reference-manual.md#compositeblockconnect)
method. The data structure for the flow graph is a table that maps block
`InputPort` instances to `OutputPort` instances. In other words, it is a hash
table of input port to output port, for each connection between blocks in the
graph.

##### Connection

When a connection is made with `connect()` on a top-level `CompositeBlock`, the
`InputPort` and `OutputPort` ports are looked up in the blocks and added to the
connections table, and a `Pipe` object is created and registered under both
`InputPort` and `OutputPort` port instances.

If a hierarchical block is connected into a top-level block, then its
`AliasedInputPort` and `AliasedOutputPort` ports are followed to the underlying
real `InputPort` and `OutputPort` ports, and those are the input and output
port instances registered in the flow graph. This means that the hierarchical
block does not exist in a top-level flow graph; it's just a convenience for
composing blocks.

Code reference: [CompositeBlock class](../radio/core/composite.lua).

##### Run Preparation

After the flow graph is connected under a top-level block, it can be run with
[`start()`](0.reference-manual.md#compositeblockstart) or
[`run()`](0.reference-manual.md#compositeblockrun).  Running a flow graph
requires a few initialization steps before each block can begin to consume,
process, and produce samples.

First, the `CompositeBlock` crawls its connections table and absorbs the
internal connections table of any hierarchical blocks. Since hierarchical
blocks were just connected at the boundary ports, the internal connections are
not yet available to the top-level block and need to be absorbed.

Next, every block referenced in the connections table is checked for
unconnected inputs. If an input is unconnected, the flow graph cannot be run
and an error is raised.

The connections table data structure is then used to build an auxiliary list
called the evaluation order. This is a list of all of the blocks in the flow
graph, arranged in a downstream and dependency-free order. Each block in this
list may depend on the outputs of previous blocks in the list, but does not
depend on the outputs of any successive blocks. This order is needed to
correctly differentiate the flow graph, because the output types of each block
are fed as the input types to downstream blocks for differentiation.

The evaluation order is followed once to `differentiate()` each block, once to
check that all of its input port sample rates match, and once to `initialize()`
each block. If input port sample rates do not match, the flow graph is not run
and an error is raised.

Finally, all of the `Pipe` objects in the flow graph are initialized. Pipes are
backed by anonymous UNIX socket pairs created by `socketpair()`.

The flow graph is now ready to run.

Code reference: [CompositeBlock class](../radio/core/composite.lua).

##### Running

At this stage, the flow graph is fully validated, differentiated, initialized,
and is ready to run.

The `CompositeBlock` first blocks `SIGINT` and `SIGCHLD` signals with
`sigprocmask()`, so that it can later synchronously detect these signals with
`sigpending()` in `wait()`. The `CompositeBlock` then calls `fork()` for each
block.

The child process for each block closes all unneeded file descriptors, and
calls the block's main `run()` method. The child process spends the majority of
its processing lifetime in this method. If this method returns naturally due to
a flow graph collapse, the child exits with exit code 0. If it returns because
of a runtime error, the child prints the error and backtrace to standard error,
and exits with exit code 1.

The parent process closes all file descriptors associated with the `Pipe`
objects it built, so that the blocks are the only owners of these connected
files, and can close them to signal block termination.

The parent returns back to the top-level script, where it can use `status()` to
get the running status of the flow graph, `wait()` to wait for the flow graph
to finish, or `stop()` to stop the flow graph.

Code reference: [CompositeBlock class](../radio/core/composite.lua).

##### Flow Graph Control

The [`wait()`](0.reference-manual.md#compositeblockwait) method waits for a
`SIGINT` or `SIGCHLD` signal. If it gets a `SIGINT` signal, which indicates a
user requested exit, it calls `stop()` to stop the flow graph. If it gets a
`SIGCHLD` signal, which indicates a block exited, it waits on each block PID
with `waitpid()` until the flow graph has fully collapsed, and then unblocks
the `SIGINT` and `SIGCHLD` signals.

The [`stop()`](0.reference-manual.md#compositeblockstop) method kills all
source blocks with `SIGTERM`, waits on each block PID with `waitpid()` until
the flow graph has fully collapsed, and then unblocks the `SIGINT` and
`SIGCHLD` signals.

The [`status()`](0.reference-manual.md#compositeblockstatus) method checks if
any block is still running with `kill(<pid>, 0)`.  If all blocks have exited,
it waits on each block PID with `waitpid()`, and then unblocks the `SIGINT` and
`SIGCHLD` signals.

Code reference: [CompositeBlock class](../radio/core/composite.lua).
